Bloom Optimization story. (#553)
huggingface/blog: bloom-inference-optimization.md

---
title: "Optimization story: Bloom inference"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/bloom-inference-pytorch-scripts/thumbnail.png
---

<h1>Optimization story: Bloom inference</h1>
<div class="blog-metadata">
    <small></small>
    <a target="_blank" class="btn no-underline text-sm mb-5 font-sans" href="https://github.com/huggingface/blog/blob/main/bloom-inference-optimization.md">
        Update on GitHub
    </a>
</div>

<div class="author-card">
    <a href="/Narsil">
        <img class="avatar avatar-user" src="https://aeiljuispo.cloudimg.io/v7/https://s3.amazonaws.com/moonup/production/uploads/1608285816082-5e2967b819407e3277369b95.png?w=200&h=200&f=face" title="Gravatar">
        <div class="bfc">
            <code>narsil</code>
            <span class="fullname">Nicolas Patry</span>
        </div>
    </a>
</div>

> This article aims to reconstitute slightly the story behind making an efficient

Reviewer: This article gives you the behind-the-scenes of how we made an efficient inference server that powers bloom.

> This article aims to reconstitute slightly the story behind making an efficient

Author: ```suggestion
This article gives you the behind-the-scenes of how we made an efficient inference server that powers bloom.
```

inference server that powers [https://huggingface.co/bigscience/bloom]().

We achieved 5x latency reduction over the course of several weeks (and 50x more throughput). But this article

> aims to show more the struggles and epic wins we had to go through in order to achieve that

Reviewer: But this article aims to show more the struggles and epic wins we had to go through in order to achieve that => We wanted to share all the struggles and epic wins we went through in order to achieve such speed improvements.

> A lot of different people were involved at many stages so not everything will be covered here. And please bear with us, some of the content might be outdated, flat out wrong because

Reviewer: outdated, or flat out wrong
lots of new hardware features and content

> A lot of different people were involved at many stages so not everything will be covered here. And please bear with us, some of the content might be outdated, flat out wrong because
> we're still learning how to optimize extremely large models and lots of new features
> hardware and content keep coming out regulary.

Author: ```suggestion
A lot of different people were involved at many stages so not everything will be covered here. And please bear with us, some of the content might be outdated or flat out wrong because
we're still learning how to optimize extremely large models and lots of new
hardware features and content keep coming out regulary.
```

If your favorite flavor of optimizations
is not discussed or improperly represented, we're sorry, please share it with us
we're more than happy to try out new stuff and correct our mistakes.

# Creating bloom

This goes without saying but without the large model being accessible in the first
place, there would be no real reasons to optimize inference for it. This was an
incredible effort led by many different people.

In order to maximize the GPU during training, several solutions were explored
and in the end [Megatron-Deepspeed](https://github.com/bigscience-workshop/Megatron-DeepSpeed) was chosen to train the end model.
This meant that the code as-is wasn't necessarily compatible with the `transformers`
library.

# Porting to transformers

Because the original training code, we set out to do something which we regularly

> do, port an existing model to `transformers`. The goal was to extract from the

Reviewer: do:

training code, and make all of this effort more accessible to everyone afterwards.
This effort was tackled by [Younes](/ybelkada).
This is by no means a small effort as it took almost a month and [200 commits](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/pull/17474/commits) to get there.

There are several things to note that will come back later:

We needed to have smaller models [bigscience/bigscience-small-testing](https://huggingface.co/bigscience/bigscience-small-testing) and [bigscience/bloom-560m](https://huggingface.co/bigscience/bloom-560m).
This is extremely important because they are smaller, so everything is faster when 
working with them.

First, you have to abandon hope to have exactly the same logits at the end down

> to the bytes. PyTorch versions can change the kernels and introduce subtle difference, and different hardware

Reviewer: introduce subtle differences,

> to the bytes. PyTorch versions can change the kernels and introduce subtle difference, and different hardware

Author: ```suggestion
to the bytes. PyTorch versions can change the kernels and introduce subtle differences, and different hardware
```

***Getting a good strict test suite is really important for all models***

The best test we found was having a fixed set of prompts. You know the prompt,
you know the completion that needs to be deterministic so greedy.
If two generations are identical, you can basically ignore small logits differences
Whenever you see a drift, you need to investigate. It could be that your code
is not doing what it should OR that you are actually out of domain for that model
and therefore the model is more sensitive to noise. If you have several prompts
and long enough prompts, you're less likely to trigger that for all prompts by
accident. The more prompts the better, the longer the better.

The first model (small-testing) is in `bfloat16` like the big bloom so 
everything should be very similar, but it wasn't trained a lot or just doesn't perform
well, so it highly fluctuates in outputs. That means we had issues for those generation
tests. The second model is more stable but was trained and saved in `float16` instead
of `bfloat16`. That's more room for error between the two.

To be perfectly fair `bfloat16` -> `float16` conversion seemed to be OK in inference

> mode (`bfloat16` existss mostly to handle large gradients, which do not exist in inference).

Reviewer: existss mostly => mostly exists

> mode (`bfloat16` existss mostly to handle large gradients, which do not exist in inference).

Author: ```suggestion
mode (`bfloat16` mostly exists to handle large gradients, which do not exist in inference).
```

During that step, one important tradeoff was discovered and implemented.
Because bloom was trained in a distributed setting, part of the code was doing

> Tensor parallelism on a Linear layer. meaning running the same operation as a single

Reviewer: part of the code was doing Tensor parallelism on a Linear layer meaning running (=no period after layer)

> Tensor parallelism on a Linear layer. meaning running the same operation as a single

Author: ```suggestion
Tensor parallelism on a Linear layer meaning running the same operation as a single
```

operation on a single GPU was giving [different results](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/blob/main/src/transformers/models/bloom/modeling_bloom.py#L350).

> This took a while to pin point and either we went for 100% compliance and the model

Reviewer: pinpoint (one word)

> This took a while to pin point and either we went for 100% compliance and the model

Author: ```suggestion
This took a while to pinpoint and either we went for 100% compliance and the model
```

> was much slower than it could, or we would take a small difference in generation

Reviewer: I would remove "than it could"

but was much faster to run and simpler code. We opted for a configurable flag.

# First inference (PP + Accelerate)

Now we have a workable `transformers` clean version of the start
working on running this.

Bloom is a 320Go(176B parameters in bf16) model, we need at least that much

> GPU RAM to make it fit. We explored briefly offloading to CPU on smaller machines

Reviewer: briefly explored (vs explored briefly)

but the inference speed was orders of magnitude slower so we discarded it.

> Then we wanted to basically the [pipeline](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/v4.22.2/en/pipeline_tutorial#pipeline-usage).

Reviewer: sorry, I think this is missing a word -  basically "what" to the pipeline?

> Then we wanted to basically the [pipeline](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/v4.22.2/en/pipeline_tutorial#pipeline-usage).

Author: ```suggestion
Then we wanted to basically use the [pipeline](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/v4.22.2/en/pipeline_tutorial#pipeline-usage).
```

So it's dogfooding and this is what the API uses under the hood all the time.

However `pipelines` are not distributed aware (it's not their goal). After briefly
discussing options, we ended up using [accelerate](https://github.com/huggingface/accelerate/) newly
created `device_map="auto"` to manage the sharding of the model. We had to iron

> a few bugs, fix a little the `transformers` code to help `accelerate` do the right job.

Reviewer: iron out a few bugs, fix the 'transformers' code a bit in order to help 'acceleration' do the right job.

> a few bugs, fix a little the `transformers` code to help `accelerate` do the right job.

Author: ```suggestion
a few bugs, fix the `transformers` code a bit to help `accelerate` do the right job.
```

It works by splitting the various layers of the transformers and giving part of

> the model to each GPU. So GPU0 gets to work, then hands it out to GPU1 so on

Reviewer: hands it over to GPU1

> the model to each GPU. So GPU0 gets to work, then hands it out to GPU1 so on

Author: ```suggestion
the model to each GPU. So GPU0 gets to work, then hands it over to GPU1 so on
```

and so forth.

In the end, with a small HTTP server on top we could start serving bloom (the big model) !!

# Starting point

But we haven't even started discussing optimizations yet !

We actually have quite a bit, all this process is a castle of cards. During
optimizations we are going to make modifications to the underlying code, being 
extra sure you're not killing the model in one way or the other is really important
and easier to do than you think.

So we are now at the very first step of optimizations and we need to start measuring

> and keep measuring performance. So we need to consider what we care about.

Reviewer: keep measuring performance

the best we can imagine to achieve.
The formula for amount of operations is `24Bsh^2 + 4𝐵s^2h24Bsh^2 + 4𝐵s^2h` where `B` is
the batch size, `s` the sequence length and `h` the hidden dimension.

Let's do the math and we are getting `17 TFlop` for a single forward pass.
Looking at the [specs](https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/data-center/a100/) of A100 it claims `312 TFLOPS` for a single card.
That means a single GPU could potentially run at `17 / 312 = 54ms/token`. We're using 16 of those so `3ms/token` on the overall
machine. Take all these numbers with a big grain of salt, it's never possible to reach those numbers,
and real life performance rarely matches the specs. Also if computation is not your limiting
factor then this is not the lowest you can get. It's just good practice to know how far you are from 
your target. In this case we're 2 orders of magnitude so pretty far. Also this estimates puts
all the flops at the service of latency which means only a single request can go at a time (it's ok since you're maximizing your machine
so there's not much else to be done, but we can have a higher latency and get throughput back through batching much more easily).

> # Exploring many routes. 

Reviewer: I would remove the period after routes.

We assumed it would be hard to do much better.

The second thing, is that `Gelu` operator was actually launching many elementwise
kernels and overall it was taking a bigger share of compute than we expected.

We made the change from:

```python
def bloom_gelu_forward(x):
    return x * 0.5 * (1.0 + torch.tanh(0.79788456 * x * (1 + 0.044715 * x * x)))
```

to 

```python
@torch.jit.script
def bloom_gelu_forward(x):
    return x * 0.5 * (1.0 + torch.tanh(0.79788456 * x * (1 + 0.044715 * x * x)))
```

This transforms the operations from multiple small element wise kernels (and hence tensor copies)
to a single kernel operation !

This provided a 10% latency improvement from 91ms/token to 81ms/token, right there !

Be careful though, this is not some magic black box you can just throw everywhere, 
the kernel fusion will not necessarily happen or the previous used operations 
are actually already extremely efficient.

Places where we found it worked really well:

- You have a lot of small/elementwise operations
- You have a hotspot with a few hard to remove reshape, copies in general
- When the fusion actually happens.

## Epic fail

> We also had during our testing periods, ended up at some point seeing some consistent

Reviewer: We also had some points, during our testing periods, where we ended up seeing some...

> We also had during our testing periods, ended up at some point seeing some consistent

Author: ```suggestion
We also had some points, during our testing periods, where we ended up seeing some consistent
```

25% lower latency for the Rust server compared to the Python one. This was rather
odd, but because it was consistently measured, and because removing kernels provided a speed
up, we were under the impression that maybe dropping the Python overhead could
provide a nice boost. 

> We started a 3 days job, which was to reimplement the necessary parts of `torch.distributed`

Reviewer: We started a 3 day job to reimplement the necessary parts...

> We started a 3 days job, which was to reimplement the necessary parts of `torch.distributed`

Author: ```suggestion
We started a 3 day job to reimplement the necessary parts of `torch.distributed`
```

To get up and running in the Rust world [nccl-rs](https://github.com/Narsil/nccl-rs).
We had the version working but something was off in the generations compared to its 
Python counterpart. During investigation of the issues, we figured...

> **that we had forgot to remove the profiler in the Pytorch measurements**....

Reviewer: forgot => forgotten

That was the epic fail, because removing it gave us back the 25% and then both
codes ran just as fast.  This is what we initially expected, that python mustn't
be a performance hit, since it's mostly running torch cpp's code. In the end,
3 days is not the end of the world, and it might become useful sometime in the
future but still pretty bad.
This is quite common when doing optimizations to do wrong or misrepresentative
measurements which end up being disappointing or even detrimental to the overall
product. This is why doing it by small steps and having expectations about the
outcome as soon as possible helps contain that risk.

Another place where we had to be extra careful, was the initial forward pass (without
past) and the later forward passes (with past). If you optimize the first one, 
you're most certainly going to be slowing down the later ones which are much more
important and account for most of the runtime.
Another pretty common culprit, is measuring times which are CPU times, and not

> actual CUDA times, you need to to `torch.cuda.synchronize()` when doing

Author: ```suggestion
actual CUDA times, so you need to to `torch.cuda.synchronize()` when doing
```

runs to be sure that the kernels completes.

## Custom kernel

> Now, we had achieved close to DeepSpeed performance without any custom code 

Author: ```suggestion
So far, we had achieved close to DeepSpeed performance without any custom code 
```

say to the softmax operator to ignore those values. Also the softmax needs to be calculated
on float32 (for stability) but within a custom kernel, we could limit the mount of 
upcasting necessary so we limit them to the actual sums and accumulated needed.

Code can be found [here](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/blob/thomas/add_custom_kernels/src/transformers/models/bloom/custom_kernels/fused_bloom_attention_cuda.cu).
Keep in mind we had a single GPU architecture to target so we could focus on this
and we are not experts (yet) at writing kernels, so there could be better ways
to do this.

This custom kernel provided yet another 10% latency increase moving down from
81ms/token to 71ms/token latency. All the while keeping our flexibility.

After that we investigated and explored other things like fusing more operators
removing other reshapes or putting them in other places. But no attempt ever made
significant enough impact to make it to the final versions.

## Webserver part

Just like the Rust counterpart, we had to implement the batching of requests
with different parameters. Since we were in `PyTorch` world, we have pretty
much full control of what's going on. 

> Since we're in Python, we have the limiting factor that the `torch.distributed` 

Reviewer: I would remove "Since we're in Python,"

Author: I won't remove it, this part is important `PyTorch` doesn't necessarily imply `Python`. (And `Python` is the culprit)

needs to run on several processes instead of threads, which means it's slightly
harder to communicate between processeses. In the end, we opted to communicate
raw strings over a Redis pub/sub to distribute the requests to all processes at once.
Since we are in different processes it's easier to do it that way than communicating
tensors (which are way bigger) for instance.

Then we had to drop the use [generate](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/v4.22.2/en/main_classes/text_generation#transformers.generation_utils.GenerationMixin.generate) since
this applies the parameters to all members of the batch, and we really actually
want to apply a different set of parameters.
Thankfully, we can reuse lower level items like the [LogitsProcessor](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/internal/generation_utils#transformers.LogitsProcessor)
to save us a lot of work.

So we basically reconstructed a `generate` function that takes a list of parameters
and applies them to each member of the batch.

Another really important aspect of the final UX is the latency.
Since we have different parameter sets for different requests, we might have

> 1 request for 20tokens and the other for 250 tokens. Since it takes

Reviewer: 20 tokens

75ms/token latency one request takes 1.5s and the other 18s. If we were

> batching all the way, we would be making the user that asked wait for 18s 

Reviewer: asked to wait

> batching all the way, we would be making the user that asked wait for 18s 

Author: ```suggestion
batching all the way, we would be making the user that asked to wait for 18s 
```

and making it appear to him as if we were running at 900ms/token which is quite slow!

Since we're in PyTorch world with extreme flexibility, what we can do instead
is extract from the batch the first request as soon as we generated to first 20
tokens, and return to that user within the requested 1.5s ! We also happen to save 230 tokens worth of computation.

So flexibility **is** important in order to get the best possible latency out there.

# Last notes and crazy ideas

Optimization is a never ending job, and like any other projects, 20% work

> will yield 80% of the results usually.

Reviewer: will usually yield 80% of the results.

> will yield 80% of the results usually.

Author: ```suggestion
will usually yield 80% of the results.
```

    <a href="/Narsil">
        <img class="avatar avatar-user" src="https://aeiljuispo.cloudimg.io/v7/https://s3.amazonaws.com/moonup/production/uploads/1608285816082-5e2967b819407e3277369b95.png?w=200&h=200&f=face" title="Gravatar">
        <div class="bfc">
            <code>narsil</code>
            <span class="fullname">Nicolas Patry</span>
        </div>
    </a>
</div>

This article gives you the behind-the-scenes of how we made an efficient inference server that powers bloom.
inference server that powers [https://huggingface.co/bigscience/bloom]().

We achieved a 5x latency reduction over several weeks (and 50x more throughput). We wanted to share all the struggles and epic wins we went through to achieve such speed improvements.

A lot of different people were involved at many stages so not everything will be covered here. And please bear with us, some of the content might be outdated or flat out wrong because
we're still learning how to optimize extremely large models and lots of new
hardware features and content keep coming out regularly.

If your favorite flavor of optimizations
is not discussed or improperly represented, we're sorry, please share it with us

> we're more than happy to try out new stuff and correct our mistakes.

Reviewer 2: Thank you for the feedback, Nicolas - That works.

# Creating bloom

This goes without saying but without the large model being accessible in the first
place, there would be no real reasons to optimize inference for it. This was an
incredible effort led by many different people.

To maximize the GPU during training, several solutions were explored
and in the end, [Megatron-Deepspeed](https://github.com/bigscience-workshop/Megatron-DeepSpeed) was chosen to train the end model.
This meant that the code as-is wasn't necessarily compatible with the `transformers`
library.

# Porting to transformers

Because of the original training code, we set out to do something which we regularly

> do:  port an existing model to `transformers`. The goal was to extract from the
> training code and make all of this effort more accessible to everyone afterward.

Author: ```suggestion
do:  port an existing model to `transformers`. The goal was to extract from the
training code the relevant parts and implement it within `transformers`.
```

This effort was tackled by [Younes](/ybelkada).
This is by no means a small effort as it took almost a month and [200 commits](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/pull/17474/commits) to get there.

There are several things to note that will come back later:

We needed to have smaller models [bigscience/bigscience-small-testing](https://huggingface.co/bigscience/bigscience-small-testing) and [bigscience/bloom-560m](https://huggingface.co/bigscience/bloom-560m).
This is extremely important because they are smaller, so everything is faster when 
working with them.

> First, you have to abandon hope to have exactly the same logits at the end down

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, you have to abandon all hope to have exactly the same logits at the end down
```

Reviewer 2: can't parse:
> at the end down to the bytes.

to the bytes. PyTorch versions can change the kernels and introduce subtle differences, and different hardware

> might yield different results because of different architecture (and you probably

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
might yield different results because of a different architecture (and you probably
```

> don't want to dev on a A100 GPU all the time for cost reasons).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
don't want to develop on a A100 GPU all the time for cost reasons).
```

everything should be very similar, but it wasn't trained a lot or just doesn't perform
well, so it highly fluctuates in outputs. That means we had issues with those generation
tests. The second model is more stable but was trained and saved in `float16` instead
of `bfloat16`. That's more room for error between the two.

To be perfectly fair `bfloat16` -> `float16` conversion seemed to be OK in inference
mode (`bfloat16` mostly exists to handle large gradients, which do not exist in inference).

During that step, one important tradeoff was discovered and implemented.
Because bloom was trained in a distributed setting, part of the code was doing
Tensor parallelism on a Linear layer meaning running the same operation as a single
operation on a single GPU was giving [different results](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/blob/main/src/transformers/models/bloom/modeling_bloom.py#L350).
This took a while to pinpoint and either we went for 100% compliance and the model
was much slower, or we would take a small difference in generation
but was much faster to run and simpler code. We opted for a configurable flag.

> # First inference (PP + Accelerate)

Reviewer 3: You should define what you mean by PP as pipeline parallelism as many different meanings depending on people. Usually people mean there is a scheduler in pipeline parallelism with each GPU processing part of the batch, and Accelerate only does vertical model parallelism, or sequential parallelism (again the terminology depends on people).

Author: I added a big bold note (I briefly mentioned what I meant in the text, but you're right it's better to be more explicit than not.)

Now we have a workable `transformers` clean version of the start
working on running this.

> Bloom is a 320Go(176B parameters in bf16) model, we need at least that much

Author: You're correct, it's slighty more but it's not 176*2 somehow (Maybe the output layer is counted in params yet it's reused with the embedding.)

> Bloom is a 320Go(176B parameters in bf16) model, we need at least that much

Author: I still put 352, the point remains and avoids raisons questions in the reader's mind.

> Bloom is a 352Go (176B parameters in bf16) model, we need at least that much

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Bloom is a 352GB (176B parameters in bf16) model, we need at least that much
```

            },
        )

    @task
    def bloom_small(self):
        sentence = "Translate to chinese. EN: I like soup. CN: "
        self.client.post(
            "/generate",
            json={
                "inputs": sentence[: randrange(1, len(sentence))],
                "parameters": {
                    "max_new_tokens": 20,
                    "do_sample": True,
                    "top_p": 0.9,
                    "seed": random(),
                },
            },
        )
```
**Note: This is not the best nor the only load testing we used, but it was
always the first to be run so that it could compare fairly across approaches.
Being the best on this benchmark does NOT mean it is the best solution. Other
more complex scenarios had to be used in addition to actual real-world performance.
**

We wanted to observe the ramp-up for various implementations and also make sure
that underload the server properly circuit breaked. Circuit breaking means
that the server can answer (fast) that it will not answer your query because too
many people are trying to use it at the same time.
It's extremely important to avoid the hug of death.

> On this benchmark the initial performance was (on 16xA100(40Go on GCP which is the machine used throughout):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
On this benchmark the initial performance was (on 16xA100 40Go on GCP which is the machine used throughout):
```
Or close the parenthesis.

Requests/s : 0.3 (throughput)
Latency: 350ms/token (latency)

Those numbers are not that great. Before getting to work let's estimate
the best we can imagine achieving.

> The formula for amount of operations is `24Bsh^2 + 4𝐵s^2h24Bsh^2 + 4𝐵s^2h` where `B` is

Reviewer 3: Note that you can do LaTeX with the syntax `\\(  \\)`

Author: TIL I'll skip it now because it's not that important in readability I feel, but good to note.

but overall reducing the number of operations and tensor creation is a good direction.

Other parts come out more clearly when you start [profiling](https://pytorch.org/tutorials/recipes/recipes/profiler_recipe.html) and we used quite extensively the [tensorboard extension](https://pytorch.org/tutorials/intermediate/tensorboard_profiler_tutorial.html)

This provides this sort of image which give insights:

<img src="assets/bloom-inference-optimization/profiler_simple.png">
Attention takes a lot of time, careful this is a CPU view so the long
bars don't mean long, they mean the CPU is awaiting the GPU results of the
previous step.

<img src="assets/bloom-inference-optimization/profiler.png">
We see many  `cat` operations before `baddbmm`.

Removing a lot of reshape/transpose, for instance, we figured out that:
    - The attention is the hot path (it's expected but always good to verify).
    - In the attention, a lot of kernels were actual copies due to the massive amount of reshapes
    - We **could** remove the reshapes by reworking the weights themselves and the past.
    This is a breaking change but it did improve performance quite a bit!

> ## Supporting TP

Reviewer 3: Again, you should explain here what you mean by TP. Most people mean it as each weight is split across the GPUs and I'm not sure that it's what the solution does.

Author: It is !

Ok, we have removed most of the low-hanging fruits now we went roughly from 350ms/token
latency to 300ms/token in PP. That's a 15% reduction in latency, but it actually provided
more than that, but we were not extremely rigorous in our measuring initially so let's stick to that figure.

Then we went on to provide a TP implementation. Turned out to be much faster
than we anticipated the implementation took half a day of a single (experienced) dev.

> The result is [here](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/tree/thomas/dirty_bloom_tp). We were also able to reuse code from other projects which helped.

Reviewer 3: This points to a general fork of the repo. Would be nice to point out to the places that are modified.

> The result is [here](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/tree/thomas/dirty_bloom_tp). We were also able to reuse code from other projects which helped.

Author: ```suggestion
The result is [here](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/tree/thomas/dirty_bloom_tp/src/transformers/models/bloom). We were also able to reuse code from other projects which helped.
```
